---
layout: post
title: Getting Clojure - Review
tags: ["review", "books"]
date: 2018-02-17 12:06:31
---

I started out programming by learning some PHP, then a little bit of
Perl, then some Ruby on Rails. In my first job I was programming in
Ruby sans Rails, and knew I had to get up to speed quickly. I
purchased Russ Olsen's *Eloquent Ruby* (2011) and read it
front-to-back, though I struggled a bit towards the end. I tried some
things out, and then I read it again. Then I played around with some
of the things in the back. I went back and read it a third time, now
with the understanding that some of the things in the back were
dangerous.

Up until *Eloquent Ruby*, the resources I had used to learn all had
the same agenda: how to tell the computer to do stuff. In other words,
they would describe the *features* of things. Features are easy to read
and reason about, they are the core of all technical writing. It is
much harder to describe the *attitudes* toward a particular technical
thing. *Eloquent Ruby* was a huge surprise to me - the idea that one
could not just learn the rules that make up a language, but to learn
all the idioms that embody the language in use, things that might
change over time. But at that particular time, I was enamored (?) with
the idea that I could learn to speak Ruby like a native, a concept
that seemed foreign to most otherwise dry technical books.

By this time I felt bold enough to call myself a Rubyist - I loved
working with the language. I bought another of Olsen's books on design
patterns and read it cover to cover, again, several times. And of
course, ambitious as I was and knowing that a "good" programmer has
experience in different programming paradigms, but still not quite
sure what direction I would go, I was very interested to hear that
Russ was either working on, or had declared an intention to write a
book about Clojure.

I had no idea at this point what Clojure was, but Russ had gained my
trust enough for me to want to read about his new book, whatever this
thing was.

Of course I had no idea at the time that this book would be in the
pipeline for several years. I understand, these things take time. But,
impatient as I was, I started learning about Clojure anyway. I have
now played with it for about 3 years, have consumed several books that
were very good at what they set out to do (very adequately and
exhaustively survey the features of the language), have built some
things of a certain size. Alas, not getting to code and think in my
second language every day, I have never felt that I really "got"
Clojure, that I really knew it under the skin in the same way that I
knew Ruby. I could not properly call myself a Clojurist. (?)

So I was pretty excited when I learned that Russ' book was nearing
completion, and that it was to be called, quite perfectly, *Getting
Clojure*. When it came out in beta form, I did something I almost
never do - I bought the eBook (I like to do my reading away from the
computer).

And I have not been disappointed. I am so happy that all the elements
of Olsen's style are present - his gentle humor, his writing with
compassion for the learner, knowing what to leave out, what to
illustrate and to explain deeper, even if you think you know it. There
are examples that are made up yet so much more compelling than most
(it's hard to find ones that solve real problems and that are
sufficiently complex). There are lots of details on *why* you might
want to use a particular thing, or more importantly, why you might not
want to, aka "staying out of trouble". And there are many examples of
real Clojure in use, often pulled from the Clojure source itself, that
not only illustrate but give me the confidence to dive in myself.

It seems strangely ironic that *Getting Clojure* isn't the book I
wanted way back then, but is the book that I need now. It is not a
book for beginners, though I did enjoy going over the earlier
chapters, cementing knowledge along the way, forming a new narrative
that keeps the things I don't need to know at arms length, while
emphasising/giving me the tools to ... find out more.
