---
layout: post
title: Hey What
tags:
- music
- low
date: 2023-01-01 08:59:16 -0700
---

- Background
- Alan's guitar
- Language of the album
- Loss of Mimi/Cancer reading

I must have listened to Low's _Hey What_ LP more than any other this last year. It's impossible to listen to now in 2023 outside of the context of Mimi Parker's passing on November 5 (_I remember...._). I personally have never felt a greater loss of a public figure.

- _The consequences of leaving / would be more cruel if I should stay_. so begins White Horses, the opening track to Low's 2022 album _Hey What_, the final syllable resolving sweetly by Mimi Parker alone in a descending cadence punctuated by Alan Starhawk's stabby guitar pattern.

- There is a hidden melody in the guitar as different harmonics are emphasized and dance around on an otherwise rigid 4/4 pattern

- Alan's guitar, now swamped by synth noise and strings, seems to swell in its heavily fuzz'd form for a moment before submitting to the overwhelming tide.

- The song doesn't quite end so much as seems to fall apart, is stripped back to its bare elements, deconstructed, seems to go on almost too long as if searching for something newn, and out of the broken pieces forms another, _I Can Wait_. This is much less a collection of songs than an attempt to make something out of almost nothing, over and over.

- _If I could trade, I would trade_.

- _All night / You fought the adversary / It was no ordinary fight_

- Indeed, Alan, always experimenting, seems to have abandoned almost every element of his sound that has been more or less signature since 20xx's Tree album.

- (all night) The song seems to swell, impossibly loud, suggesting almost a Hey Jude style exit, but abruptly denies itself, as if falling momentarily into a lush dreamscape before being rudely awakaened, with all the restrain of before, barely aware of what just happened.

- Form imitates content in _Disappearing_ as the fidelity of Alan's guitar seems to deteriorate randomly.

- _Hey_, apart from being one half of the title track, seems to evoke the spirit of the album more than any other. It is as if a lone voice trying to reach you through the limitations of the medium, it both echoes around its limited chamber and foreshadows itself, hearing thin traces of vocals before they come into focus.

- If you listened to the album on vinyl you would have found yourself in the infinitely extended end of the album, cut into the locked groove, extended the last traces of Mimi's smothered final _Hey_ in a wash of ethereal ambiance. It is, in light of her devastating departure, one of the most tragic sounds in all of popular music. _Maybe that's the last thing you should say_.

- _Days Like These_' final pop cadence takes an unexpected minor twist, setting us up for the second half.

- The rhythmic pulse of _There's a Comma After Still_ continuing themes from earlier....seems to suggest itself a deconstruction of sound as waveforms, vibrations.

- _Don't Walk Away_ Alan's final love song to Mimi? Acknowleging both how much she must mean _The Shadow in your Eye / The Whisper in your Ear_ and the longevity of their relationship (they have known each other since xxx) _I have slept beside you now / for what seems a thousand years_.

- (It must be wearing off) coda

- alan's guitar dueling forces of excess and restraint.

- _The Price You Pay_, unlike _Hey_, doesn't actually go on forever, but it could. In fact, the night I took a Indica edible and listened it _seemed_ to, and I've never experienced anything more chillingly devastating/crushing. Deep bass thrum.
