---
layout: post
title: "Do the Right Thing"
---

I once knew a wise, old man. I knew he was a wise, old man because he
embodied certain stereotypes about wise old men. First, he was a
Gray-Bearded Yogi. Before this he was a New York Jew and a practicing
Freudian Psychoanalyst. He had a wry smile and would say some
interesting and funny things. And at other times he would smile and
nod and say nothing at all. I can't remember if he ever stroked his
beard. And his name was Ramya.

One day he said to me, "Asoka," (which was the name under which I was
going at the time). "Asoka," he said, "do you know what is the single
driving force behind all our desires, motives and actions?" I thought
about this for some time. I had my own ideas but, knowing he was a
Freudian, suspected that the answer was going to be something to do with
the libido.

"You probably suspect that the answer is going to be something to do
with the libido," he said. "But it's not." I listened patiently. "It's
the need â€¦ to be right." I laughed. While I wasn't totally surprised
to have heard a different answer, this one for some reason blew me
away, but not straight away. I wasn't prepared. I had never framed
human nature in those terms before.

I wouldn't expect anyone else to have the same reaction. I suspect
others would find this to be either obvious, banal, or plainly
wrong to them, and if this you, I don't intend to try to convince you
otherwise (there might be a certain irony in doing so). What I want to
do instead is to document what became for me a personal manifesto, and
a lens through which I began to look at the world.

Eventually I saw that a preoccupation with being right was essentially
an expression of power and that asserting rightness was about exerting
power over others. I also saw that this preoccupation was perhaps more
to do with the appearance of being right, and that the cost of
maintaining it would be in missing opportunities for learning.

I was the principle subject of my examination, and it has become a
goal to continue to examine and dismantle the ways in which I assert
"rightness" in the world. But I also want to look at how groups of
people can create a culture of "rightness", the effects that has, and
what we can do to limit some of the more harmful effects.

Allegedly I come from a long line of *know-it-alls*. Unsurprisingly,
it's a behavior that passes down the male side of my family. Of
course, I don't really believe this is a genetic disposition, and it's
easy to see how this might work.

As a child I remember my family's praising me for being 'brainy'. They
gave me positive feedback for being 'right' and I learned to hide my
ignorance of things so as never to appear wrong. As long as I appeared
to be right all the time I felt like I was winning, but I was actually
losing. I've had a whole lifetime missing answers to questions I
didn't ask. I became lazy, unconsciously thinking that my smarts would
allow me to coast through life.

Once I was free of a culture principally concerned with measuring and
rewarding rightness (you guessed it - School), I had a hard time
knowing how to fit in or do well, and it would take years of
adjustments before I felt any kind of success. It came as a small
comfort to learn that I was not alone - in fact it is well understood
now that children who are praised for hard work will be more
successful than those that are praised for correctness or cleverness
(Wiseman, R. 59 seconds, Praise Be!), and for precisely the reasons
outlined above.

But things get more interesting when you examine rightness in the
interactions between people. What I'm especially interested in right now is
the fact that I don't believe I've ever seen such a high concentration
of people who are utterly driven by the need to be right _all the
time_ as in the tech industry.

What are the important ways that being right manifest itself
negatively in the workplace?





### On Leadership and Teamwork

There is a well-known meme about the experience of being a programmer
and it looks like this:

<img src="/assets/two-states.png" class="img-responsive" alt="The two states of every programmer">

While neither one of these are true, it is true that everyone is much
closer to the first state than the second. The problem with separating
out this duality is that the two abstract states all to easily become
concretized (transposed?! something?) in individuals, creating a
culture of 10x developers and, well, everyone else.

In my personal experience I have felt a strong feeling of teamwork and
commeraderie when I'm working with people who all humbly admit they
don't know what they're doing. There is the sense that we don't have
all the answers, but we will nonetheless figure it out together. It
promotes a culture of learning, of strong teamwork and kinship. When
everyone makes themselves vulnerable in this way magical things can
happen. The problem is that it only takes one person to fuck all that
up. .... This is commonly what we call "leadership", and while I don't
want to suggest that leadership and teamwork are
antagonistic/orthogonal to each other, I do want to suggest that a
certain style of leadership is toxic to it, the kind that is concerned
mainly with exerting rightness (and therefore power) downwards.

....

A good leader will make decisions (sometimes bold) to move forward
in some direction, even if that turns out to be the wrong direction.

### On Productivity

* being right stands in the way of development
** refactoring hypnosis vs kent beck's tradeoffs

A preoccupation with being right can have a directly negative effect
on productivity. One obvious way is what I will call refactoring
hypnosis - a state wherein the programmer forgets the original intent
of their refactoring efforts and continue to rework code into a more
"right" state, often with no benefit while risking breakages in the
case of legacy code.

Style is another area that is particularly prone to pointless
exertions of rightness. It is not unusual for developers to have a
preference for a certain style in whatever language they are using,
and it is interesting that while opposing styles can seem utterly
wrong to the developer it seems that this is the area in which there
are the fewest agreements over what is considered good style or
"right". In Ruby there have been attempts to unify divergent opinion
in the Ruby Style Guide but it has been known to go back and forth on
some of its specifics (or merely to state that there are competing
styles), and the fact that teams and organizations eventually grow
their own style guides (AirBnb, GitHub, Thoughtbot, Seattle.rb) show
that perhaps the only thing we can agree on is that a codebase be
consistent. Where it lacks consistency there lie opportunities to
rectify, but this is almost always a bad idea. Important historical
details get obscured by trivial wankery.

### On Culture

One sentiment that I've seen commonly expressed is the idea that no
one, even experienced a celebrated engineers, really knows what they
are doing. I think that there is both humor and truth in that but
that, while I believe the sentiment is well-intentioned, words are
important and can sometimes undermine what's being expressed
here. I've seen people I admire and look up to utter something of the
form, look, I wrote [some technology you've probably heard of], and I
still do [something stupid/dumb] - what an idiot! This doesn't
reassure me at all, all I think is, wow, if you have such a hostile
opinion of yourself, I can't imagine what you'd think of me.

What can we do instead? Perhaps instead of fostering a culture of
self-chastisement we can instead celebrate our wrongness. We know that
failure can sometimes come at great cost for others, but it's almost
always because of the systems we have in place that are
flawed. Personal failure really is a cause for celebration because it
is also a learning, and celebrating creates an opportunity to share
that learning with others while simultaneously promoting a learning
culture destygmatized of wrongness (???). (I once suggested to a
colleague that we add some ceremony to this by making weekly sharings
of wrongness ("Failure Fridays") but it never took off....)

* creates hostile discussions (PRs, etc..)
* mansplaining
** Well actually - the onramp to a mansplanation
* trying to be helpful
